---
title: Solar System Express Interview
layout: post
tags: ['post', 'Solar-System-Express','Space-Diving', 'Sol-X', 'NASA', 'space', 'DIY', 'cubesat', 'private-space', 'private-space-industry', 'DSi', 'Deep-Space-Industries', 'DIY-Rocket-Contest', 'Open-Space-University']
icons: ['facetime-video','file'] 
---
By: Michael D Mooring

<iframe class ="center-post" width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/vXi0DmcZWNc" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I had the pleasure to interview Blaze, Paul, and Kunal of <a href="http://www.solarsystemexpress.com/" target="_blank">Sol-X</a> where we talked about the <a href="http://www.openspaceuniversity.org/#!rocketchallenge/c22xk" target="_blank">DIY Rocket Contest</a> which Sol-X is part of. The contest is to design a open-source 3D printed, steel (in Sol-X's instance, full-strength Titanium) rocket engine to be compatible with nanosatellites like CubeSats. We talked about what 3D printing means for the future of space-tech, Sol-X's other exciting projects like their first product, the <a href="http://www.solarsystemexpress.com/gravity-development-board.html" target="_blank">Gravity Development Board"</a> and their <a href="http://www.solarsystemexpress.com/space-skydiving.html" target="_blank">Space Diving Suit</a>. 

The following is the raw transcript from our chat:

> [Techno Intro Music] Hello Everybody, This is Michael Mooring with Subset 3, The Hackerspace blog and we are here with Blaze, Kunal and Paul of Solar Express and we’re here to have a little chat with them. So I guess can you guys, can you tell me a little about what Sol-X is and what you guys do? Yeah sure so Sol-X was started back in 2010 after my internship and civil-servant position at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Government space does a lot of cool thing in research and development but I kind of felt like there was a cheaper, faster and more risky way of getting people into space at low costs. And so basically Sol-X was started up around that: Enabling Space Innovations in people garages around the world and our core product really is the gravity development board which we hope to be the world's first space rated, open-hardware, electronic prototyping board which will enable people of any type to build space qualified hardware. Cool, and you guys were founded by yourself Blaze in 2010 right? Yeah that’s correct, yup. I started it myself in 2010 and the first year was a lot of different research into different products and we narrowed it down over the years to what we feel has the strongest business case. Cool, so you mentioned the gravitational board and I think there’s one, you're also working on another project the space dive suit, it that correct? Yeah, it’s more of a R & D project right now. Our focus really is to get the Gravity Development Board to market, but we’re getting paid for consulting work with Juxtopia to develop the augmented reality element of the space skydiving suit. So with things like the DIY Rocket Competition we continue to put a little bit of time into the space skydiving suit as well. And I don’t know if I’m pronouncing it correctly, but Juxtopia, so that’s going to kind of be like a simulation slash game that you can kind of experience what a space dive might be like, in real life. Juxtopia is the name of a company based in Baltimore, Maryland. They’re a bio-medical start-up and they came up with the idea and pretty much pitched augmented reality, see-through, see-through displays to the US Military and it’s kind of what formed Google Glass. The idea that Juxtopia initially pitched back in, I think it was 2004 or 5. Don’t quote me on that but they really built the architecture and idea of augmented reality. That’s interesting. Yeah I got it mixed up. I was reading something a space diving game you guys were mentioning I think in some of the YouTube videos. And you guys are also part of the DIY Rocket Contest with the Open Space University and so that. That’s a new event basically you heard about that through Space Vid Cast which is something that we watch often and really that is also about open innovation in space and so and that’s why it’s so very interesting to us. It’s basically, get as many people collaborating together on open-space, on open-hardware basically and try to design a rocket engine that will work and so that’s what we’re doing. Yeah the the contest is basically designing a open-source 3D printed rocket [engine] for smaller nanosatellite type of space objects and I never knew before that you could actually 3D print steel or in your case you guys are using titanium I think right? Yeah so while I was at Marshall Space Flight Center I got introduced to the 3D printing facility down there. I had a lunar worm-bot auger made in the facility and so we have connections to be able to print in full strength titanium basically we can print at 99% strength as compared to just regular machine titanium so. Speaking of 3D printing, over the last, maybe like 3 years, 3D printing has really taken a lot of, it’s really grown a lot, it’s still pretty new but just today in-fact, I think it was today or yesterday, we had distributed defence or Defence Distributed they release a video of their single shot 3D printed gun and that’s kind of you know, they have a very political stance but what do you think of 3D printing in the context of the future of space because we know that Deep Space Industries, they have their patent, and it’s around basically taking a asteroid, mining it and 3D printing it into you know maybe even things like you know the rocket engines that you guys are designing now. So what do you think, how do you think 3D printing is going to shape space technology in the next 5 to 10 years? Yeah like you mentioned Deep Space Industries and another company called Made In Space have done so research in printing in zero G and the biggest benefit really is spare parts. One of the main reasons space missions have to carry so much equipment and things like that is in-case things break down your all you're out there all by yourself so when you're on Mars or if you're just in a space station on your way to Mars, being able to print an extra bolt or a wrench that you need to fix something could be a huge benefit and also it allows you to pack the material much tighter so you just bring fine grain steel in a bucket-shaped device and when you need a wrench or you need a bolt you 3D print it. You can also recycle that material that means that when you're done with that stuff you put it back and you can reuse it again. So, space is all about mass and being able to and being able to pack stuff tightly so those are two huge benefits. Yeah, efficiency. Speaking of DSi you're on a engineering board, is that correct? Part of. That is correct. Yeah we can’t speak too much about it because it hasn’t been publicly released yet. Okay. but they have a small group of engineering advisors that they’re looking, that they’re using start the company up. Yeah. So a little bit of a loaded question I guess but DSi versus Planetary Resources. Or do you think there’s room, you think they’ll both make it? Because basically, there’s been a lot of you know, private space in the past, a lot of, rocket companies, in the past. It’s basically been some investors putting money into the company but they kind of fell apart because they didn’t really put themselves into the company and you see companies like SpaceX and Virgin Galactic and especially SpaceX. Elon Musk personally knows, you know he’s hand on with a lot of what goes on, and that I think that’s attributed to SpaceX’s success but you know DSi and and you know there’s probably one hundred plus space companies that have came out came out in the last maybe 5 years. So, what do you think how successful do you think they’re going to be in meeting their timelines and, because space mining is it’s going to be the you know the most challenging that has ever been done in human history so far, so what do you what do you think their future is like basically? Yeah I think there’s room for both of them. That’s kind of what defines a market is having more than one company and I think that they are using slightly different approaches. They’re kind of an Apple versus PC kind of comparison. I think Planetary Resources, Planetory, Planetary Resources is more like Apple. I think Deep Space Industries will become more like the PC of the mining, mining asteroid industry. The Planetary Resources is looking after, looking at telescope technology to be used down on earth and Deep Space Industries is more the re-usable material, grinding up of asteroids and producing rocket fuel from the water that they find so I think they have different paths forward and both can be successful. Yeah. Yeah I think I think so too. I think there’s room for both of them. So going back to the DIY Rocket Contest, the rocket that you guys are producing through Sol-X, do you guys have intentions to sell printed versions of rocket one it’s ready and tested and would that be also through your connection, would that also be titanium or how, how are you going to go about that? Yeah we absolutely want to sell them. That’s kind of the reason for developing the project at all. We think that the CubeSat industry is one of the three markets that we’re going after. We also have internal uses of the rocket itself, but it’s. We will print it in titanium but also in lower cost material called z, z, z-printer. So it’s a material called Z-150. We’ve already currently printed the aerospike engine in that material, it’s kind of a ceramic material and it only costs about $40 so people and start-ups can do basic testing with that. You won’t able to light the engine but like we’ve done, you’ll be able to do compression at about 70 psi those ceramic parts. So there’s a staged approach that we’ll be able to sell it to people doing prototypes and also long term and in full scale metal versions. Cool, and speaking of CubeSat you mentioned the industry is growing. Where do you think it’s, where do you think CubeSats are headed? There’s the project I think it’s QB50. They’re going to release 50 of them [CubeSats] to do weather reconnaissance. And DARPA’s going to be, DARPA’s actually coming out with their own program called ALASA I think it is and basically they’re getting ready to CubeSat payloads and they’re gearing up for, in their presentation they’re basically speak of how the CubeSat market is picking up and they’re developing this payload launch system to get ready for, and it’s air-to-orbit launch system. So, if you know, DARPA’s getting ready for it, and obviously more, it’s happening more and more launches every year. How do you think CubeSats are going to evolve basically? What do you see for the standard in the future? Like you said you have many people using them, Deep Space Industries, ArduSat is using CubeSats as really a throw-away technology that enables low cost spacecraft. I think they want to actually keep the standard pretty set. Right now there’s 1, 3 and like 5U. Those are basically units. That you can have. I think it will eventually grow to slightly larger satellites, but the real key benefit of the CubeSat technology being able to have these really small satellites that can fit in as secondary payloads on, like the Falcon 9 or other launch vehicles so they’ll continue to grow and just their overall capabilities and but the overall structure will probably stay the same size. Yeah and when you see a CubeSat you kind of think it almost looks kind of like a LEGO block so you kind of think in the future when these become more mobile they might start linking up and being kind of like legos where they might connect in space and become a larger propulsion or a larger unit. I definitely think the CubeSat standard is interesting and it’s actually it’s about it’s like 10 years old now, so, that’s interesting. Yeah, when I meant increase capability, the electronics will continue to get better, companies will continue to work on communication systems. Laser like communication systems that enable high bandwidth communication. So the Gravity Development Board can be used inside of a CubeSat to control it’s solar panels or it’s communications system, so. More and more companies will make it easier and easier for people to develop CubeSats. Yeah and your rocket it CubeSat compatible as well, so that’s cool. Yeah, small scale. It doesn’t have any moving part which is one of it’s key features. With an aerospike engine you're able to control pitch, yaw, and roll with no moving parts and that’s key for a simple project like a CubeSat you want to keep it as simple as possible, so. Yeah, and so Sol-X is sponsoring the JURBAN Google Lunar X-Prize Team and I think you’re also part of, involved with that team as well Blaze? Yeah I was, I stopped. I was the technical program manager until last December and I moved more to an advising role which is what I prefer, technical advising role, but yeah we’re also supplying them the Gravity Development Board for their work. And so you wanted just a quick update on the team? Is that what the question was? Sorry. Sure, yeah do, I I personally don’t know too much about the JURBAN Team. Like how far along are they? Do they have any, a launch planned in the in the near-future? or anything like that? Yeah so they’re pretty far along. They’re one of the only all student teams. We have about 23 members right now and the big thing they’re currently working on right now is the mission control architecture with Capital College. So that’s near Goddard Space Flight Center. It’s the third backup basically for a lot of NASA launch, for a lot of NASA missions and so we’re using their resources and their, just their know-how from the students that are involved with the mission control there. We’ve also continued to do the welding for the lunar lander craft. So, they will be doing a airbag drop test of their lunar lander at the end of the summer is the goal. So that’s just aerospace grade aluminium welded together in a cube-like shape and there’s different portions of that lander that hold airbags that will inflate right before it lands and hits the Moon, so. The idea is to have a drop test from 120 feet and have it impact at 60 miles per hour. Just like it will on the Moon and that will prove to investors hopefully that they have a working system and that the small rover that’s inside can survive the high G loads and different things like that, so. Yeah so JURBAN then has the intensions to commercialize like some of the other teams then? Not commercial the other teams so much but they definitely want to commercial their airbag lander. Basically that would allow scientists from around the world a low cost method for landing on the Moon, on Mars, even on a asteroid with this airbag system you don’t have to worry about fancy throatable engines. You just burn one rocket engine one time and slow down to about 60 miles per hour and just let it bounce in. The Google Lunar X-Prize, there’s no requirement to land accurately, it just says land on the Moon so that’s why they picked that approach. Yeah I’ve seen some videos of, might’ve even been that exact same system and it bounces, it deflates and you’re, you’re good to go, so. Yup. And so, so far your experience with the DIY Rocket Contest, the contest is actually, it’s main sponsor is Sunglass.io, I think and what’s your experience with Sunglass? It’s kind of a interesting new product I think. Yeah it’s a new collaboration tool that allows CAD model revision history basically to be controlled. You can also add notes to the CAD model itself to give people an idea of what section continue to be worked on. There’s a chat function inside of it. Pretty cool. You can also iFrame HTML into websites to make sharing your CAD models easier. So it’s a great tool I think you know. This is one of their, one of their first really big uses and public outreach events for the tool so. Should turn out pretty well I think. Yeah I got to check it out a little bit too when I joined your team and it looks, looks pretty interesting the, I don’t think they have any competitors that I know of right now. So, definitely a interesting niche. So... CubeHero is actually another 3D CAD model revision history thing but they don’t really have the GUI interface that Sunglass has. Still a very powerful tool. Yeah didn’t know about that one. So, we kind of, I guess I kind of asked you about this but not specifically the meta question, Where where do you see the space industry in 10 years with private space really ramping up. SpaceX being very successful. Virgin Galactic just had their success with their test flight of Space Ship Two and not to mention all, all the, the things that get less media coverage but are also very interesting. Where do you think that leaves us for private, for the space industry in general in 10 years from now? I think at least 700 people will have, 700 normal people, will have flown into space with Virgin Galactic. Currently only about 540 people I think have flown into space with NASA and Russia and Japan, so. That’s a huge change. I think 10 or more people will have already been on Bigelow Aerospace hotels in space and at least 3 of the Google Lunar X-Prize teams will have tried to land on the Moon and I think one of them will have been successful. So we’ll be on the Moon commercially and definitely low earth orbit will be full of more commercial opportunities. Yup, some big milestones coming up. It’s exciting. Speaking of exciting, how can the average person get involved with space right now? What are some projects that you guys know of that basically the average person can say, get their hands dirty you know, starting tomorrow? Yeah I would join a Google Lunar X-Prize Team. I myself I joined because I went to a bar Washington D.C. where I met George Whitesides of Virgin Galactic and he told me to go speak with the team leader of JURBAN up at Baltimore, Maryland. It’s really easy, just go to their blogs and figure out where their home base are. They’re always looking for new team members. Besides for that you can also get involved with the DIY Rocket Contest. There’s different teams that have promoted themselves on the website and you can join the Sol-X team just by sending us a Twitter or a Facebook message or just emailing me directly and we can sign you up there. There’s also a lot of interesting things going on a website called Citizen Space. So they have tons of projects where you can just go look at data from satellites or from a Mars imager and help process that data and give very important information to scientists at NASA. So I’d go to Citizen Science, I think it’s .org and get involved there are well. Cool, yeah and I think the Open Space University also plans to do more contests after the rocket contest as well so you can always go to their website and see if they have a open contest and join one of those teams as well. Cool. Is there anything else that you guys want to talk about? Maybe just bring in Paul or Kunal real quick if they have anything they wanted to mention. Well I’ll go ahead and jump in. I just joined the team couple weeks ago and this is a pretty exciting time, I mean if you go back and think of the great explorers, Magellan and up through Armstrong, all of that was funded by the government or the Kings and Queens of the time. We have an opportunity now that we can go to the Moon, we can go to Mars and it’s funded by basically every household in America or in the world. So it’s a really exciting time to be part of it. Yeah I think so too. Yup and our long term goal is really to enable human exploration of space via open-hardware & software, so. Enabling the power of the people to get this us out there. Yeah that’s, that’s really good, a really Do It Yourself kind of vision. Absolutely. Cool. Well, thank you guys for your time and we will keep in touch and follow Sol-X with your progress and once the gravitational board is on the market we’ll be sure to spread the word. Awesome, yeah we can, you can follow us on Twitter at SolX2010 and Facebook at the same URL, so yeah. Cool. We’ll thank you very much and we’ll see you around. Thanks.   
